In this lecture, we're going to have a look at connected and local routes in the lab.
The topology just has one router, R1, and it's got three interfaces that have not been configured yet.
I'm going to put IP address 10.0.0.1/24 on fastEthernet0/0, 10.0.1.1/24
is going to go on fastEthernet1/0, and 10.0.2.1/24
is going to go on fastEthernet2/0.
I also have a couple of PCs that I'm going to use to test connectivity across the router. I've got
PC1 at 10.0.1.10
and PC2 at 10.0.2.10. So, let's get everything configured. So I'll go on PC1 first,
this is my PC emulator in GNS3. So to
check the config, it's 'show ip' and I can see it's already been configured with IP address 10.0.1.10/24,
and the default gateway of 10.0.1.1, and on PC2, it's already
pre-configured, IP address 10.0.2.10, and the default gateway 10.0.2.1.
But if I go on my router R1 and I'll do a 'show ip interface brief' on here, and I can see the
interfaces are not configured and they're still shutdown.
So let's configure our IP addresses on the router, actually just before I do that, I'll do a 'show ip route' first
to show you that the routing table is empty right now because I don't have any IP addresses configured
anywhere on the router. Obviously, it's not going to be capable of doing any routing. So I need to configure
those, so I'll go to global configuration, interface fastEthernet0/0 and give it IP address
10.0.0.1, subnet mask 255.255.255.0 and remember to 'no shutdown' the interface. Then
interface fastEthernet1/0 is going to be IP address 10.0.1.1,
subnet mask 255.255.255.0, and 'no shutdown'.
And finally, interface fastEthernet2/0 is IP address 10.0.2.1,
255.255.255.0 and a 'no shutdown'. And if I have a look on my routing table now, I'll do a
'show ip route' I should have my connected and my local routes added to the route table now. So because I
configured out those IP addresses, it knows that 10.0.0.0/24 is connected, and it's
out interface fastEthernet0/0. 10.0.0.0/24 is connected on fastEthernet1/0
and 10.0.2.0/24 is on fastEthernet2/0. I can also check and see what IP addresses
are configured on the interfaces as well from my local routes. 10.0.0.1 is on interface
fastEthernet0/0. It shows it as a /32 here but I can also see what the subnet is as well
just by looking at the corresponding connected route. And 10.0.1.1 is on fastEthernet1/0
and 10.0.2.1 is on fastEthernet2/0.
Okay, so I've got my routing table built now, and the router should be able to route traffic between it's
directly connected interfaces. It should have reachability to the PCs as well. So if I do a
'ping 10.0.1.10' for PC1, this ping will hopefully be successful, Yeah it's good and I can
also ping PC2 at 10.0.2.10. Sometimes it will miss the first ping as it's doing the ARP like
you see there.
So that looks all good.
Let's also check
connectivity between the PCs as well. So I'll go on PC1, and I'll ping the default gateway first, which
is at 10.0.1.1. I know for sure that this is going to work. It would be really weird
if the router could ping the PC, but the PC couldn't ping the router because a ping confirms 2 way connectivity.
the way the ping works is it sends an echo request to the destination address and then the
destination address will send a echo reply back again. We'll talk a bit more about the details of how
ping works when we do the troubleshooting section later.
Okay, so I've got connectivity between my PC and the default gateway, let's check for connectivity
between
PC1 and PC2.
So I'll ping 10.0.2.10 and this should be good too.
Yeah.
Okay.
So I've got connectivity there.
If I go to PC2, then I know for sure that if I ping 10.0.1.10 that's going
to work as well.
Okay so that is connectivity setup between the directly connected interfaces.
If I wanted to verify the path that the traffic is taking then I could do a 'traceroute' from the PC.
Let's just check the command syntax on my virtual PC here on GNS3.
Okay,
so it's 'trace' on here. So I will trace the path to 10.0.2.10 and this verifies that it
is going through just a single hop which is my default gateway to 10.0.1.1 and it then
routes it to 10.0.2.10.
Okay, so that was connected and local routes, I'll see you in the next lecture where we'll move on to static
routes.